---
title: 'Reflection on the Resilient Leadership in Action Program- Awareness as the Foundation of Resilient Leadership'
date: 2024-01-12
permalink: /posts/2024/01/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Resilient Leadership in Action
  - Awareness
---
I recently completed the Leadership in Action program, hosted by the doctoral college in December. This online course, conducted over nine intensive mornings, is an experiential leadership training designed to develop leadership skills. Specifically tailored for early career researchers, it focuses on cultivating leadership qualities in four key areas: awareness, clarity of direction, leadership presence, and resilient decision-making. In this reflection note, I will first discuss the general structure of the course and then delve into the first dimension of resilient leadership: awareness.

Participants in the program included doctoral students and early career researchers from various prestigious institutions across the UK. The program offered a series of activities to enhance our leadership skills. We were divided into different groups: buddy groups, home groups, and activity groups. In the activity groups, we met different people from the program and engaged in group activities together. Each participant had at least one opportunity to lead the team in completing an activity. The home group functioned as a larger reflection group, typically consisting of 5-6 people, where we discussed our achievements and learning from the activities. This group provided a platform for exchanging diverse opinions. In the buddy group, the primary activity was mutual reflection. Each participant was paired with a unique buddy, who was consistent across all activities. This buddy observed your behavior and provided constructive feedback. The various groups and activities were structured to progressively deepen our understanding of leadership and to apply the knowledge gained from the course in practical settings.

This program was beneficial from multiple perspectives. It helped me understand my leadership style, strengths, and weaknesses in team leadership. Interestingly, historical data from previous participants indicates that individuals from academia often have weaker awareness, which includes self-awareness, awareness of others, and environmental awareness, yet they tend to be stronger in other leadership dimensions such as clarity of direction, leadership presence, and resilient decision-making. This is likely because research training during the doctoral period focuses more on enhancing these three dimensions. This was true for myself as well, as I realized during a self-assessment at the start of the course.

As the course progressed, I gradually recognized the fundamental importance of awareness in leadership. Self-awareness is crucial for a leader: understanding one's strengths and weaknesses, recognizing working patterns, being aware of capacity limits, and knowing when to shift from dealing with pressure to managing stress. This kind of self-awareness is vital to maintain energy and avoid burnout.

Moreover, I've learned that being aware of others and the environment significantly impacts career success. Initially, in my interdisciplinary Ph.D., I feared that my lack of certain research skills and familiarity with some disciplines might impede my career. However, this course has reshaped my perspective on research. It's not solely about understanding natural or social phenomena; it also involves identifying which resources and people can help achieve research goals. This understanding of the people and environment around us is essential for choosing the right resources, setting realistic research expectations, and adapting strategies flexibly when faced with challenges.

Interestingly, awareness extends to understanding workplace conflicts. Often, in group settings, we encounter debates or differing opinions. Previously, I viewed these as mere objective disagreements. Now, I see that comprehending the perspectives and backgrounds of those involved can reveal the roots of these disagreements, allowing for quicker identification of compromise points and smoother progression of work.
In summary, my understanding of awareness resonates with Sun Tzu's wisdom in 'The Art of War': 'Know yourself and know your enemy, and you will never be in peril in a hundred battles.' This encapsulates the essence of awareness in leadership — understanding oneself, others, and the environment to navigate challenges effectively.

In addition to the course content, I also formed a valuable friendship with my assigned Buddy. She holds a senior research position at Cambridge and leads her own research team. I have been consistently impressed by her sharp insights and creativity. Her feedback is always on point, and we are committed to continuously monitoring each other's progress. We provide feedback on the effectiveness of applying what we've learned from the leadership course in practice. Moreover, we support each other and offer guidance when facing obstacles.
Fortunately, fulfilling the promise I made to my buddy on our shared padlet, I have completed my first self-reflection note on the leadership course. This accomplishment marks a positive start to the new year. I will gradually update the other three aspects of resilient leadership over the coming months.


